so I will talk about decentralized
management of digital objects for
science and although I'm giving the talk
what I will present is not my own work
or but solely my own work but you'll see
the essentially the works of five core
developers and a dedicated documentation
project team and given that we've heard
how important funding and networking is
I'm happy to say that we're funded and
networked so that should give you an
indication of the likelihood of survival
for the immediate future
so I'll be talking about the so called
data LED and it's for a joint management
of data code through their entire life
cycle so that includes varying control
getting data from A to B it's a free and
open source software I've written in
Python MIT licensed it has Python API
and a command-line interface and so on
and instead of you know giving you a
lengthy explanation of you know what
this really means and what the details
are given that this is a developer
meeting I anticipate the question sounds
like it why not use git and I can tell
you that a daily dataset which is the
core data structure that the data and
software uses to handle everything is
actually good repository so everything
you're seeing feature-wise sits on top
of a very mature let's call it industry
grade base of tooling there are a few
principles that we follow in the
development of data list that try to
make sure that we don't ruin the the
features and possibilities that the tool
like it gives us so for example Dale had
only recognizes two entities in the
world once or you know files we all know
them and data sets which are collections
of files and there's there's no other
you know domain-specific specialization
in there we try to minimize custom
procedures and and routines that are
necessary so if kid provides this
feature to implement a solution for a
given problem then we will do that with
the aim that if they let being and
somewhat academic the
project happens to die that its users
will not unnecessarily suffer from that
death but they can continue with you
know the mature based still being intact
and I think we can agree that if get
vanish something will the will will be
developed that allows allows us to
transition to it and we also try very
hard to not compromise the complete
decentralization that it allows us so no
mandatory services and if you've worked
with git and you try to put lots of data
into get you'll know that it doesn't
handle large files very well could
question to the room who knows about
where I was heard about get annex so
quite a few people get annex is the tool
that we use in data LED in order to
manage large files so instead of
managing putting the content into a
version control we only put information
about its location and identity into
into kit which makes a lot of things
much more easy and Gideon acts for those
who don't know it but no kid large file
a support is the from our perspective
and given the principles that I
mentioned the superior alternative
because it's a completely decentralized
solution so every everything that you
can do with git for code you can do with
Gideon X plus get four large files which
is very nice and the purpose of data led
here is to make well for those who know
give annex the the the actual use inside
it to transparent to to a certain degree
so when I just said that we are you
basically using get and get annex and
everything that we want to do can be
done with them why is there a need for
dedicated software it sits on top of it
and there's a there's a single most
important reason there are other reasons
but one is most important and that is a
single repository is typically not
enough for many of the workflows that we
need particularly in science and there
are technical reasons for that for
example if you try to put a million
files into git repository or try to do a
hundred thousand commits you will
quickly see the end of the system and
the their other application based issues
for example if you have different bits
of information that are targeting
different
with different access permissions and so
on it gets very complicated even on a
technical level to make that happen if
you're if you're stuck with a single
repository and there are other reasons I
could go on about this quite a while so
in science we essentially only have what
I would call modular data management
issues in particular in collaborative
environments so if we look at a typical
science workflow then we're talking
about the combination of individual
pieces that have been developed in the
past into something that produces novel
results which will then be published in
one way or another
all right so in more abstract terms
we're talking about aggregation of works
across time and also different
collaborators or contributors so mapping
these on to dedicated repositories it
feels kind of natural right so you
develop a library you have a source code
repository for it you have a data
catalog you have a you know some sort of
data set for that all right so these
modular environments are kind of natural
to the thing that we do now what I want
to show you now is a lot of code that
just runs through and just gives you a
more or less visceral demonstration how
how that feels like if you do it with
git and get eggs natively so just click
the play button it's not necessary that
you you know read all the lines what's
happening here it's basically assembling
in git usage the picture that we've just
seen so there's a student that created a
repository for code there's another
student that collected some data put it
into another repository and now there's
a postdoc that creates another
repository that uses git sub-module
mechanism to combine these repositories
into a third repository that then will
track analysis results that have been
derived from the combination of the the
data or the application of some novel
analysis algorithm to these data so that
could be a situation that has happened
in the past it's the situation in in
some lab and now the PI comes
after a while and write up a paper about
this so how does it look like if we have
another git repository that tries to you
know contain the manuscript which then
you know somewhat you know
comprehensively tracks all the input so
how does it look like so we start with
the repository gets created and then we
put in the entire study repository as a
annex infused repository and the P I
need to remember that this one needs to
be initialized so he needs to look at
you know what the branches are that are
available and then we need to omit that
one and of course at this point we are
ready so we can use git and I get again
to assemble the entire work tree which
clones all the repositories we have a
nice project based directory that
contains the data the code everything
that's necessary really nice for
reproducibility excellent but the P I
find the code a buck in the code it
happens right so tries to apply the fix
to the code repository because the
postdoc is not there to do it for the
pie so it goes right in there so it's a
decentralized system it should be no
problem to just do it in any random
clone and then tries to just get add the
code and then the problem start in this
in this scenario so it does not really
well or makes the usage of those
sub-module mechanisms really easy so we
have to remember if we want to commit
something to the code repository then we
have to remember where's the code
repository go into the code repository
and then commit it there but given that
it's a sub module we will discover that
it uses what's called detached head so
if you couldn't commit something to that
will later on discover that we cannot
publish it back to the original
repository it all becomes a nightmare
and in the end we have to go up the
hierarchy and commit all the changes in
order to have a an orderly clean
repository at the very end and of course
this can all be done but it's very
complicated and tends to be used as an
argument why we wouldn't want to use
that kind of machinery in typical
science workflows and then there are
little bits and pieces we can we can use
git NX to to obtain a data that's what
it's written for but again
anacs focused on a single repository so
it won't it won't give us the data we
need unless we go back to the repository
that actually contains the data and then
discover it you know it knows where how
to get it from through fields the file
handle and so on we have data all
situation that we wanted everything is
good and at the end of the project the
problems are still not done because we
can't just use a system call to remove
the project because git annex uses
special tricks and pieces to protect us
from data loss which then turn out to be
involve required knowledge that we need
to give it back permissions and so on so
and you can imagine how that would feel
like for a person who doesn't do that
full-time right so all the information
is lost all the time needs to be
rediscovered all the time
it's a big hassle and and causes
complications so for the rest of the
demonstration we'll just do the PI part
again and use data let so you can you
can see how it's different we use the
exact same pieces as input that were
produced by the students and the postdoc
to provide the the building blocks for
the paper but will now use just daylight
commands so we can create a dataset
which is create a git repository simply
by using create that's all you need to
remember we can clone any other data set
at any place in any other data set and
make it a sub data set that uses the sub
module mechanism we don't see it yet all
the setup that is necessary is done
inside we can ask for any piece in this
super data set simply using the get a
command that will automatically obtain
all the intermediate repositories that
might be necessary in order to fulfill a
request to a particular data file or
code file all happens automatically
there is no need for specific
reinitialize ation and the great thing
is that if we actually work with these
hierarchies data led will feel will make
this hierarchy of nested repositories
actually feel like a single mono repo so
we can do things like status requests
and it will tell us not only that the
top-level sub data set or sub module is
modified but give it an actual
indication what is the situation all the
way down and because it can do that it
can also apply modifications
really quickly so we can you can just
say save me this entire thing and it
will make sure that the actual change is
committed to the repository that
contains the change and all the
repositories upstairs know that there
was a change that was caused by this
thing and applies to commit messages all
the way up so we have a clean hierarchy
at the at the very top so that's my idea
of an of a demonstration how you know
why data lad is particularly suited more
suited than then get and gain annex on
their own for these modular workflows so
the situation if we if we continue this
line of thought is that we can
essentially map all those modular
problems where we have data that comes
from you know different entities is
maintained at a different pace evolves
at a different pace has different access
permissions etc that we still want to
combine to produce scientific results in
a very you know identifiable and
accountable way we can map onto these
technological pieces and you can use the
same kind of idea in many contexts
alright so it doesn't have to be science
it could also be for example the
scenario of a continuous integration
system where you have a repository of
data maybe that was the output of a
scientific study right but you want to
use it in context of continuous
integration so you use it as a
dependency to a software package and the
the sub dataset doesn't need to be
polluted with the idea that it's now
being used inside a continuous
integration system so you can flexibly
reuse components of data or code in in
whatever system you're you're trying to
build and oops and the the point I would
make is that this model actually scales
quite far so if you go to this page on
github you can actually data let clone a
repository that tracks 50 million files
and 80 terabytes of data where the
actual sub data sets four-and-a-half
thousand of them don't even live on
github nor does the data and for data
let it just feels like clone this thing
get me that file and it figures all out
internally given you have access
permissions and the readme tells you how
to get that so it's it can extend quite
far into the into the you know
complexity that we often face in
scientific scenarios another key bit
that is missing in in most cases most
version control systems is that we
typically don't know what the cause for
a change was right so we if we if we
modify a file in in some code base then
we have to be disciplined and amended
with an appropriate commit message in
order to you know transmit the message
of what the cause for that change was to
the past right if we run any sort of
tools in in scientific data processing
that step is typically not captured
right we have input data then some
script is applied with some parameters
to produce output data but not
necessarily is the is that parameter
ization or how exactly the script was
called recorded which is a huge problem
for reproducibility of scientific
results right because at the point where
you want to reproduce the person who's
done it is usually no longer accessible
and everything is a big question mark so
in data light thank you and they're like
we can we can use the machinery that
I've just shown you that it can
basically analyze and and and and commit
arbitrarily complex trees of you know
connected or nested modular units to
very simply capture pretty much
arbitrary modifications of any data set
with only thing we need to do and data
led provides the tool called run is we
just wrap the execution of an arbitrary
command line with data let and data like
there's nothing but checking that
working tree is clean however complex
runs the tool checks what the
modifications are and then makes a
commit message that amends that recorded
modification with information about what
tool was run in which way and puts it in
a commit message like we would do with
the manual edit in a code base and now I
hear some of you saying yeah but you
know if you
can compute it on one system that
doesn't mean you can compute another
system so lots of information still
missing but we all know that there is
technology like containers right so lots
of you know scientific institutions are
capable of running things like
singularity right singularity containers
just a file this system is built for
tracking files of arbitrary size right
so you just put your container in there
it's tracked like any other piece that
you use and daylight provides a specific
extension to make use of those
containers so you run the same execution
and they like performs the exact same
thing make sure it's clean apply it
record to change amend to commit the
commit message but the execution
actually runs in the container that the
data set also contains so you pretty
much have achieved comprehensive
provenance tracking although you don't
know still don't know what exactly
happened inside that execution but you
know which execution it was and you
could do forensics later on which is
much more than what normally is able to
do and the last point I want to make in
the in the remaining minutes is that
we've heard about the necessity for
metadata repeatedly and especially if
we're going you know to heterogeneous
data collections large data collections
stuff that we cannot you know humanely
process I would I would say it's it's an
issue how we deal with metadata and
metadata how we describe data isn't is
an active field of research for decades
and has the problem of you know not
really delivering the great results that
justify all the effort that went into it
and that's because these things are
changed all the time and we need to
somehow automate these these issues in
order to be able to track the
developments that are done on the
metadata description research and apply
them to the the vast amount of data that
that is being processed and generated so
in data light just to register the
thought there is this idea that metadata
is programmatically extracted from data
and multiple representations of the same
information can live in parallel next to
each other so we can use a metadata
standard that exists today and
transition to a new one once it's
available and have that transition be
machine aided so it quickly it can be
done with justifiable effort and they'll
its purpose here is not to be a
comprehensive description engine the
description is the duty of the specific
domains of application that know how
data needs to be described the purpose
of data light here is that you can
provide a little script that tells data
that here is the metadata that I you
know learned about this data set and it
takes care of handling it of storing it
in a in a standardized format also being
able to detach it from the data set in
order to be able to put it into
databases to enable queries insurance
urchin and and and so on
so to summarize Dale ed is a tool that
makes the combination of kit and gain
annex for decentralized data management
much more convenient and simpler for
many scientific workflows where we're
not necessarily being interested in
making every scientist a software
developer and cannot afford it and it
has AIDS
provenance capture and discoverability
through support of metadata and there is
it can do much more than I was able to
to present today and if you want to find
out more you can go to handbook tow
Delatour org and get a fairly
comprehensive view of what it can do
both from the basics of you know wise
version control important for for
science and for other applications but
also for specialized use cases that shed
light on problems like how to construct
a scalable data store or how to write a
reproducible paper for for science using
this type of tooling and with that I
thank you and we're also hiring not just
in in not just in Germany but also in
the US so whatever you prefer
get in touch please thank you
[Applause]
thank you that was not a question but I
would like to repeat that he has talked
about to the core devs for four years
but until the talk here we never
understood right so so question one was
whether we are employing wc3 proof
standard for provenance capture and the
the two-stage answer one is data that
doesn't care what we support it just
accepts you know a structured report of
whatever structure and if that's crappy
then it will be crappy but it will be
managed if it's good like wc3 proof
which data let's own metadata extractors
internally use yes then it will be more
usable but there is no requirement that
the metadata your first attempt at
metadata needs to be perfect or
standardized or signed off by some
entity you can do whatever you want if
you think that's useful and the second
question was whether we push containers
using some standardized mechanism to
some kind of archive or catalog yeah
there's there's there's nothing in data
let that does that but but for us again
they let knows files and data sets so
container is a file it you can data it
has an extension mechanism where it
would be very simple there's a template
you can clone from from github where you
kids you could add sub commands today
let that for example would say okay list
me all the containers that it knows in
this data set and then you know give
them you know unique identifier
somewhere but there's no built-in
support in daylight
what how so the question was whether I
rise it if you excuse me the the
question was whether its way of
identifying information is sufficient
for scientific data and whether we
should switch to something that is based
on a different theory is that fair and
and so the I can tell you I've never
thought about that because the this
whole project is about practicality
right so we are sitting on top of get
not because we like it's theoretical
implications but because it's a widely
adopted platform that we still have to
discover the limitations for the work
that that we've been doing right and
likewise forged an axe right it
interfaces with the source
infrastructure that the planet has right
now right so so that's why we're doing
it if this turns out to be a problem I'm
sure it turns out to be a problem not
within the scope of data let but within
the scope of you know tracking
information or identifying information
in general and then I'm sure we'll jump
on the train wherever it goes when it
goes thank you
[Music]
right so in internet we don't even we
don't make that decision right in there
let it's good annex that is responsible
for for data transport so good annex for
example can use torrents for data
transport you can use ipfs for data
transport it can use all kinds of stuff
right if your data is on Amazon's big
hard drive you don't care right and it
can use that too right so we're not you
are not making a decision for a
particular single technology because in
our experience there is no single
technology that serves all the use cases
right and and that's why that is get an
access domain and it does that really
well so in in in that is they make
different choices and they they have a
more you know stringent you know set of
technologies that they choose for
reasons that are valid and and there's
no it's not that
you know we we can you can do similar
things and they let plus it's it's it's
Foundation
there is no you know direct conflict of
any sorts
you